---
title: 'Entropy: An Introduction'
layout: default
date: 2020-07-14
keywords: blogging, writing
published: true
---

In this post we'll introduce the concept of _entropy_. _Entropy_ gives a measure of how much uncertainty there is in a random variable.  As we'll see throughout the course, entropy is one of the most fundamental concepts of information theory.  First, we give the formal definition of entropy, then we'll work on developing some intuition behind the definition and give some illustrative examples.

Let's say we have some discrete random variable $X \sim p(x)$ with a set of potential values $\mathcal{X}$ and a probability mass function $p(x)$.  We now define entropy formally.

<div class="definition">
The entropy $H(X)$ of a random variable $X$ is defined as
{% katexmm %}$$ H(X) = -\sum_{x \in \mathcal{X}}p(x)\log p(x) $$
{% endkatexmm %}
</div>

where $\log$ is typically taken to be base 2. This definition can appear opaque at first glance - it's not obvious why this quantity in particular should give us insight into the "uncertainty" of $X$ beyond what we would know from e.g. its expected value and variance. However, with some manipulation we can better understand what this quantity means.  Before we do so, let's step back and review some basic probability theory. In particular, let's recall the definition of the expected value of a random variable

<div class="definition">
The expected value $E$ of a discrete random variable $X$ distributed according to $p(x)$ is
{% katexmm %}$$ EX = \sum_{x \in \mathcal{X}} p(x)\cdot x$$
{% endkatexmm %}
</div>

This definition is _close_ to what we have for $H(X)$, though in the entropy case we have $-\log p(x)$ instead of $x$ itself. Can we reconcile these two? As it turns out, yes! Suppose we apply some deterministic function $g$ to our random variable $X$ - this gives us a new random variable $g(X)$. Since the randomness in $g(X)$ is solely due to $X$, intuitively we should be able to compute $Eg(X)$ using $X$'s pmf without needing to compute $g(X)$'s pmf. It turns out that our intuition here is correct; this is a well-known result in probability theory that is used enough to have its own name

<div class="theorem" text="Law of the Unconscious Statistician (LOTUS)">

{% katexmm %}$$ Eg(X) = \sum_{x \in \mathcal{X}} p(x)\cdot g(x)$$
{% endkatexmm %}
</div>

Despite the intuitive nature of this theorem, proving it is quite involved in the general case[^1] and is outside the scope of this post.  Nevertheless, we make use of this theorem by letting $g(X) = -\log p(X)$, giving us

{% katexmm %}
$$ \begin{aligned}
        H(X) &= -\sum_{x \in \mathcal{X}}p(x)\log p(x) = E[-\log p(X)]
    \end{aligned}$$
{% endkatexmm %}

How is this definition help us?

Suppose we want to communicate the outcome of an event represented by our random variable $X$. Ideally (to save money, power, etc.) we'd like to do so with as short a message as possible on average, so our encoding should use fewer bits to encode high-probability events and more bits to encode low probability ones. It turns out (we'll see this later), an optimal coding scheme for this problem requires at least $-\log p(x)$ bits to transmit an outcome $x$.[^2] Thus, we can view entropy as the average number of bits required to transmit the outcome of $X$ in an optimal encoding scheme (i.e., _no_ coding scheme can encode the outcome of $X$ with fewer than $H(X)$ bits on average). While we won't have the tools to prove these results until later, a simple example will help illustrate this interpretation of entropy.

<div class="example" text="Let">

{% katexmm %}$$X = 
    \begin{cases}
     a & \text{with probability 1/2} \\
     b & \text{with probability 1/4} \\
     c & \text{with probability 1/8} \\
     d & \text{with probability 1/8}
    \end{cases}
$$
{% endkatexmm %}
</div>

How could we devise a code to transmit the outcome of $X$ in this case? If $X = a$, we send a 1 and end transmission, otherwise we send a 0 and continue. Similarly, if $X = b$, we then send a 1 and stop, otherwise we send another 0. Finally, if $X = c$ we send a 1 and stop, otherwise we send a 0 and stop. Under this scheme, we send a total of 1 bit half the time, 2 bits 1/4 of the time, and 3 bits 1/4 of the time, giving us a total of 1.75 bits on average. Each time we ask our "questions" in this scheme, we're eliminating half of the remaining probability space. In the same way that binary search eliminates half the solution space (and is optimal), we'd expect this encoding scheme to be optimal.

Plugging in to our formula for entropy we find 

{% katexmm %}$$H(X) = -\frac{1}{2}\log\frac{1}{2}-\frac{1}{4}\log\frac{1}{4}-\frac{1}{8}\log\frac{1}{8}-\frac{1}{8}\log\frac{1}{8} = 1.75 \text{ bits}
$$

so our proposed code is indeed optimal.
{% endkatexmm %}



[^1]: See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Law_of_the_unconscious_statistician for a full proof
[^2]: This isn't 100% true, and I'm being a bit hand-wavy here just to build up some motivation for the definition of entropy, but we'll delve into the technical details in a later post